Octave and underage drinking
############################

:tags: octave; octconf;
:date: 2012-08-21 15:44

Octave is just like good wine.  It's in constant active development
and has a good ageing potential.  Using Octave today is a better
experience than using it 2 years ago, and from what I have seen, it
will be an even better experience later.

However, unlike wine, you can be of any age to drink it.  It's
interesting to notice how with the help of `Google Summer of Code
<http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/homepage/google/gsoc2012>`__ and
`ESA Summer of Code in Space
<http://sophia.estec.esa.int/socis2012/>`__ Octave got new students
involved on it, some of them under the legal drinking age.  If you are
following `planet Octave <http://planet.octave.org/>`__ you probably
read some of their posts already.  Does this mean that Google and ESA
support underage drinking?  Of course this is variable between
countries and the students in question are all legal drinkers on their
own countries.  But the nature of Octave is different, it can be tried
on the internet where it's hard to decide what rules apply.  And so,
Octave also brings up curious sociological questions, just as the new
world brings down the old concepts of geographical limitations.

If you hang around ``#octave`` on irc.freenode.net, you will discover
that it can be quite a social activity too.  And OctConf2012, a
physical congregation of Octave connoisseurs, was just a month ago in
Montreal, Canada.  And even others have show up, people new to the
flavour learning how to have the best taste of it.

But it is not an exclusively social activity.  Octave respects your
comfort zone.  Just like a bottle of wine or whisky, you are free to
enjoy it on your own, laying on your best chair with Pink Floyd on the
background.

Finally, Octave is also completely odourless and your breath won't
give away what you have been up to.  You'll get no angry or
disappointed words or looks from your parents, partner, children or
pets.

It doesn't matter on young you are.  Stop giving grey hairs to your
family, join the Octave developers in the ageing process.  Come drink
with us and enjoy Octave responsibly.
